God creates the heavens and the earth in six days, resting on the 7th.  He creates human beings in his own image and places them in the Garden of Eden.  They disobey God by eating from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil and are removed.  Cain kills Abel in the first act of violence which escalates over time into God destroying humanity with a flood, save for Noah and his family.

God calls Abraham and Sarah, descendents of Noah, to move to the Land of Canaan and grow his family into an expansive tribe, numbering the stars in the heavens and grains of dust on the earth, whose purpose will be to bless all the people of the earth.  Abraham’s descendants grow from a family, to a tribe, and eventually follow Joseph to Egypt during a famine.  The Hebrews thrive in Egypt, growing into a nation, until a pharaoh enslaves them for circa 400 years.

Moses rescues the Hebrews from slavery and leads the battered nation into the wilderness for a time of testing. God gives them the Ten Commandments (Decalogue) as well as 613 laws that make up the Hebrew “pathway” (Halacha).  Moses develops a priesthood, a system of sacrifices, and a Tabernacle.

The Israelites move back into the Land of Canaan under the leadership of Joshua and a theocratic network of Judges. For a period of 300 years they work to re-take the land of Canaan.  It is a bloody period of warfare and undulating faithfulness.  Eventually, the tribes of Israel settle into the land and ask God for an earthly king.

The United Monarchy is a period of 120 years of unity and relative stability under Saul, David, and Solomon.  A capital city is established in Jerusalem, a Temple is built, and worship is centralized.  Solomon marries 700 wives of foreign religion, has 300 concubines, and the nation eventually is broken apart and divided.

Prophets arise during this time of confusion and religious syncretism, calling the now divided Kings back to God.  Part of the prophets message is God’s judgment, punishment and discipline that occurs through a series of foreign occupations; the Assyrians in the 8th century BC, the Babylonians in the 6th Century BC, then the Persians, the Greeks, and eventually the Romans.  

Within the prophet’s messages is the promise of a coming Super-Leader (an elevated Messiah, prophet, priest and King) who would save Israel and bring all the nations together.  Christianity believes Jesus to be the fulfillment of that promised leader, who brought healing, truth, and final atonement to every human being.  Through Jesus, all the people of the earth will be blessed, fulfilling the original promise to Abraham and Sarah.